Do you feel as if the students should work more
today to develop their own tools and processes?
Would this make them feel more one with the
environment? Well, I don't think they should. But
everything is sort of a trade-off. And certainly,
when you do develop your own equipment, you
develop more interest in the data. and you
understand more exactly the limitations of your
data. But this is enormously time consuming and in
the modern world, or much better off, to be able to
buy equipment off the shelf. I would never want
people to go back and do it the way we did it. It's
like asking whether you would rather go to
California by covered wagon or by by auto, but
there isn't much you can say, but you certainly,
when you go by covered wagon, you see more of the
country. What about the idea of financing
students? Several people have commented they
think the students are too well financed today in
terms of doing graduate work, that you acquire
technicians rather than people who are
innovative in attempting to identify with new or
old fields. Would you agree with that? Well, I
would say Yes, there's a certain element of truth
there.
The ground rules, when Irma and I were a student, is
that we were paid this amount of money for
assisting Shepard, but then anything which
really applied to our thesis work, we were
supposed to do on our own without any salary or
compensation. So we were being paid more or less
half time a dollar a day and the other half, but we
could spend half that time working on our thesis.
But this was sort of without compensation. We
really was not considered cricket to be supported
in your research. And well, this goes back to the
philosophy of even professors in those days were
taught to teach. And research was thought to be
kind of fun you could have as a compensation for
doing this chore of teaching. You weren't really
compensated for it. for doing research. This was
sort of your personal enjoyment. And that, of
course, is not really a valid philosophy. And I'm
glad to see it go by the board. So I don't agree that
students should do thesis work without support.
But at the same time, they tend to become perennial
students. And certainly at places like Scripps
and elsewhere, they And also, the staff members
are part of this conspiracy, because they like to
have this assistance. And they tend to assign
students to do a job. They hire them, and they
control their work too much. I must say that Henry
and I were encouraged. In fact, we more or less
selected our own pieces. It was our idea to do just
what we did, within the general context of using
some of the data our work there, so this is quite the
whole philosophy here has changed over the years.
You keep speaking of Emory and I, and I have a note
here to ask you. What was the nature of the joint
work with Emory? That is, when a man goes into
partnership
with a research friend in the time, was this fairly
common then? Well, I wouldn't say so. I think the
relationship was rather unique because
we were Shepard's two first students in
oceanography, and he's had some 60 more over the
years. And he more or less took us in as members of
his family. And we were roommates for three or four
years, as well as working together on this
project, so we became very closely identified in
doing this work, so I think it was rather an unusual
circumstance. Was oceanography more personal
then, in the sense of personal relationships,
than it is now? I would say it was, yes. It was a much
smaller
group of people, and it was people that were In a
sense, they received
very small compensation for their work. And so
they were penurious people. And
we were isolated from the social and scientific
community generally, being in a separate field,
which was not really recognized. And this tended,
I suppose, to pull people together. Now, in
California, I used to know all the oceanographers
in the world and all the marine geologists,
certainly. And I used to know all about marine
geology. I don't anymore. The more old you get, the
less and less you know. But
there was a time when I knew all the marine
geologists. Well, for example, in California,
this marine geologist finally wanted to come
along named David Moore. Well, now there are six or
seven marine geologists named Moore in
California alone. And I keep getting confused
about which Moore is which Moore, but I mean this is
how the field has expanded. Enormous expansion
where you kind of lose contact, you lose the
personal contact with people. Well, when a man
like Roger Revell comes to Scripps at almost
exactly the same time you do, as a matter of fact,
would you automatically know his interest? Would
you exchange information with him? Would you be
social friends? Oh, yes. Oh, we were very close to
Roger Vell. And he had started a few years earlier,
but of course, he went to Norway and came back and
returned at that time. He was working on the
Carnegie results. And so. And he also got involved
in this project and sailed at sea with this group.
So we were extremely close friends, yes, and it was
a very close relationship. When you're aboard a
ship and you, for a month at a time, and, you know,
with six or eight people aboard, you get to know
people very well. Stands to reason.
When you were thinking of oceanography at Scripps
at this period, Did you tend to all be generalists,
that is, you all discussed the same problems, or
were you already moving towards a technological
division in oceanography? That is, were you
primarily interested in geology and someone else
primarily interested, let's say, in marine
biology, or was there much exchange of
information in terms of problems? These separate
fields were recognized then. I mean, we
recognized the main branches of oceanography,
which were marine biology and marine geology. The
geophysics aspects of geology was almost
undeveloped then. And physical and chemical
oceanography, these divisions were recognized.
But in those days, we all knew other people's
field. I mean, I felt then I knew a good deal about
physical oceanography and about chemical
oceanography. I was involved in doing chemical
analysis, seawater analysis. And I felt then I
knew much more about it than I do now because, well,
the knowledge was so basic and primitive. And you
did cross fields. And you tended to become a
generalist rather than a specialist. You have a
phrase in your work, our most productive years,
you say, in these early years at Scripps. Do you
bring to science sort of a youthful, enthusiastic
energy that seems to wane over the years? Is that
the nature of scientific research? Well,
certainly you'll have much more energy in the
early years.
I don't... Did I say they're the most productive
years somewhere in my publications? Yes, you said
our most productive years, speaking of the years,
it scripts right up to World War II. I wonder if you
saw... What I'm trying to find out is, did you see a
break, let's say, with World War II? Do you feel as
if when you begin to move in and around
oceanography in the Navy that somehow your active
years of research seem to lessen? Your
publications don't seem to indicate that. No, I
wouldn't say so. I think they're... But I... I
think you could make more important
contributions, very simple sort of descriptive
observations in those days than you can now. I
wrote papers in the early years about sea surface
slicks, for example. And I wrote a paper about the
transparency of the atmosphere in the Antarctic.
And I wouldn't attempt that nowadays because it's
just too specialized. I feel I don't know anything
about it. case of Fools Rush In Where Angels Fear to
Tread, but also there was no literature on it, so
you could contribute something new. And I wrote a
very basic paper on slicks, which I now, I don't
know enough about it to ever attempt to write
another paper on slicks. And I wrote a paper on deep
scattering layer, which is acoustic and
biological paper, but the state of knowledge
wasn't so specialized that you could really make
an important contribution out of your particular
specialty. But I think at Scripps, the number of
publications we got out was quite impressive,
considering the small budget. And the papers, I
think, were significant, too. We did the first
work, for example, on the phosphorite nodules,
which was a very significant discovery. And many,
many, many very good publications on very small
budgets. So the relationship between the amount
of money and number of publications or the quality
is very doubtful, whether you have large amounts
of money or small amounts. You seem to be able to get
some good results. You say the Navy was not
interested in oceanography in the early 40s, but
the Hydrographic Office is being reorganized
then. When would you feel as if the Navy committed
itself to oceanography? During World War II.
During World War II, I think mainly the people at
Woods Hole became, well Scripps too of course,
through the University of California Division of
Air Research, they both turned to on problems of
importance to the Navy.
It isn't quite certain the impact they had upon
wartime results, but certainly it was
significant matter of Often by hindsight, for
example, the way predictions associated with
amphibious landings, thermal structure
associated with the back of the thermograph of a
spill house and the submarine, anti-submarine
warfare, the sediment type, sediment on shelves
associated with the submarine operations and
resting on the bottom, that sort of thing. It
became very important. The Navy became, became,
much interest in oceanography during and at the
end of the war. But I think this interest is mainly
because oceanographers like Ravel infiltrated
the Navy. And when we say the Navy, this is a
non-personal thing. But when you realize that
there are people in the woodwork like Roger Ravel,
they provided the catalyst to speak for the Navy. I
should amplify a bit because there are people like
Marshal Sergeant and Ravel John Lyme and others,
and Bates, who
became part of the Navy operation. And at the end of
the war, they became sufficiently influential to
get the Navy interested in oceanography. And so
they established the Office of Naval Research,
which was a very, very critical step And the whole
philosophy of a military department, military
service sort of sponsoring a science and giving
out grants and aid was a whole new concept at that
time. And this was successful because of the
establishment of ONR and its grant policy, which
was unique. among the services, and really the
whole field of grantsmanship was unique in those
days. Well, what about you in those days? You know
that you were at Scripps really until about, until
41, you were at the Scripps Institution of
Oceanography there. What happened to you between
41 and 45? Well, I,
at University of Illinois, in my When I began my
junior year, military service was required for
two years, you know, in the ROTC. And I had decided
not to go on in the advance car, but at the last
moment when I was going through registration, I
signed up to go into the advance car. And
this was a turning point in my life because it... I
had no idea I'd ever used this training. Of course,
the clouds of war were already gathering. And so, I
was a reserve officer in the field artillery. And
so, after Pearl Harbor, even before that, of
course, when I graduated, I got my PhD. I was really
in effect, I suppose, received a deferment for a
while so I could finish. That was the summer of 41.
And I came out to Scripps with my new PhD, and I
applied to work for what was then to become the
University of California Division of War
Research. And Emory did get employed, it did work,
and so did Shepherd, but the fact that I had this
reserve commission meant that I tried to get into
war research rather than in as an officer. But I was
called up in August of 41. And
because I had had this flying training and a
private license at University of Illinois, I was
eventually going into the Air Force. And I
eventually went through flying school and became
an Air Force officer. I am now a retired lieutenant
colonel in the Air Force. But so those years, out of
oceanography, spent in the Air Force. Again,
always trying to use my scientific training as a
PhD, but never successful. Except I finally got
into photo mapping, which is somehow associated
with geology. But I was there purely as a pilot. I
never could
get a proper billet in the services to utilize my
scientific capability. So when the time after the
war and then I received a letter from Eugene LaFond
who had organized what is now the Navy Electronics
Laboratory and he invited me to join there so I at
that time people were mustering out of the
services so I left the Air Force and came west to
join the newly developing Naval Aquatics
Laboratory, and that's a group being formed by
Eugene LaFond, which was doing oceanographic
work under Navy sponsorship. This is 1946. 1946.
He invited me to come out, but I guess what the,
really the the carrot and the stick, because he
suggested I come out. And I was being there
organizing a project high jump, which involved
going to the Antarctic for three or four months.
And that was a great interest to me, this chance to
go to the Antarctic under the aegis of the Navy and
Richard Byrd. And so I came out there. And within a
month's time, I put together what equipment I
could. I was aboard this task group going down to
the Aeronautic Ocean as the oceanographer on what
was called the Western Task Group. There were
three separate groups of ships going down, and I
was in charge of the oceanography on the Western
Group. Myself and a Scripps technician named
Herbert Mann went along with me on that trip. You
were really going to be attached off and on, if I may
use that word correctly. in San Diego until about
1963, are you not? Yes, that's right. I was,
I, during my time at NEL, I spent one year in Japan as
a Fulbright Fellow, and then four years with the
Office of Naval Research in London, and I came back
again to the Navy, and in 60, but in 63, I
transferred
to to Washington to what was then the Coast and
Geodetic Survey. Now, as they know, a National
Ocean Survey. I have several questions about this
period right here. What major projects did you
work on while you were at NEL? You go to work
primarily upon the structure of ocean floors. Do
you remain? Well,
we made an attempt to work upon the problems of
marine geology. The climate was not very
favorable there at Naval Aquatic Laboratory
because they were a hardware-oriented group and
there was a great emphasis upon underwater sound.
And we were trying to establish a foothold of
oceanography in the Navy. And we did establish a
Center of Excellence in Oceanography. And we were
a very small part of the lab. We were something like
In terms of personnel, we were something like two
or three percent of the lab, but we were writing
more than half the papers, and so we had great
visibility. This really didn't help us because we
were being criticized all the time for writing for
the scientific literature and scientific
publications and not for Navy publications and
not for the admirals, and not doing things which
were considered to be directly applied to Navy
mission. We wrote papers on general science of
marine geology and oceanography. And many, many
of these efforts were not considered pertinent.
And we had to hide our proposals under military
adjectives, which were very popular in those
days. And I must say that the management was sort of
in collusion with us. They went along and they
realized what was happening. We do the same thing
nowadays. We use the ecological adjectives when
to explain something we're doing we at any
particular time there's a certain amount of
something's in vogue and somehow you must couch
your terms and those terms to to remain funded we
were very poorly funded we had our salaries but
very little more beyond that but it was very
remarkable when I came back after four years in
London that you say oceanography today is sort of a
a bright science it suddenly bloomed I guess in
about 58 or so, because then when I returned from
London to the Navy Lab, I came back, of course, I
came back with the Bathyscaphtra Est, but the
oceanography in the meantime had become rather a
darling science, if I may use the word, and
suddenly people that were prior to my departure
were called physicists and acousticians
suddenly were wearing hats. They were listed as
oceanographers. It suddenly became sort of an
okay science. And this was quite a remarkable
transition and something which you were aware of
when you were away for four years and suddenly came
back and saw this new, this sudden new look. What
took you to the ONR office in London in the 50s? Why
did you choose that? What were the facts behind it?
Well, uh...
I was
recruited to go there by the ONR staff and I guess
the idea of going to London, going to a foreign
country and getting involved in something which
had a good deal of challenge and a promotional
opportunity had certain appeal and it was a very
good assignment and it was an enjoyable
assignment but I uh i'm not sure it was a wise move in
my part because it's it was mainly administrative
and it's very difficult to go from research
scientist into administration and never come
back into research again because you're you
suddenly lose contact with the field of
literature and you're not up to date and also i
think doing research involves sort of mental
training it's like It's like when you train for the
Olympics or something like that, you exercise and
do certain things. When you do research, you think
along certain lines, and that part of your brain
atrophies if you don't stay with it. You become a
good administrator, but your ability to do useful
research suddenly, it takes a year or so to get back
into being a research person, and it's difficult
to switch. What would be your job in the O&R office?
Our job in O&R was the mission of the O&R office was
to establish liaison and with British and
European science
mainly more or less in Navy interested fields but
it was very very broad and my responsibility was
more or less in the oceanography and geophysical
sciences. And this mission was a very good mission
when ONR was first, ONR London was first created in
late 40s because all these ties had been broken and
we had no knowledge of what had developed in
Germany or anywhere in Europe or even in England in
a very immature sort of way. The contacts we have
nowadays are sort of one to one. But in those days,
you had to go through channels. And it was very
difficult to learn about developments which had
occurred.
But when I was there, this mission of liaison and
that level already had become a bit passe because
these bonds were being generated. And people
were, again, working directly. And people were
traveling overseas, which they getting to
travel. And so this mission was somewhat passe.
And I realized that. And for that reason, I got
involved in certain things which really weren't
supposed to be part of the mission. So one of my big
involvements there was
being involved with the Bathyscaphe Trieste and
with Picard and with trying to get the Navy
involved in deep submergence, The Navy had an
interest in not only in ships, of course. The sea
was their environment. But in those days, and I
think even now, they're spending more money on
aircraft than on ships. And they were spending
zero money on deep submergence. And they had no
budget at all. They had no precedent. they had had a
blimp program, a lighter-than-air program,
which was wiped out at the end of the war by the huge
hurricane here in Florida, which wiped out most of
their blimps down at Richmond Air Force Base. They
wrapped up the lighter-than-air program, but the
bathyscaphe is simply an underwater, of course,
is now an underwater blimp.
So My interest, I thought the best thing I could do
was to get the Navy back into the field of deep
submergence, and the Bathyscaps Trieste
provided that vehicle to work with Picard and get
small funding. We got $40,000 for his, we weren't,
the mission of our office was not contracting, but
we did have a few contracts with European
scientists, and I managed to get these funds
together for Picard. to get the Bathyscaphe
Trieste back diving, and eventually for the Navy
to buy it and bring it to the U.S. and make the deep
dive in the Challenger Trench, and this Project
Necton, which Picard and I thought of. And this
really got the Navy back in deep submergence. The
last time I know this, the Navy's deep submergence
budget, I think, I don't know, six to eight years
ago, was something like $40 million a year. So it
went from zero to in the mid-50s to a substantial
program, which it is nowadays. And this was the
opening wedge of getting Navy involved in deep
submergence, manned deep submergence in DRVs and
URVs. Do you have any explanation? I have a
question here to ask you about that. Do you have any
explanation why it took the Navy so long to become
interested in this sort of thing? Well, in any
large organization,
it's very difficult to establish a precedent. And
the smaller groups tend to be flexible. But in any
large organization, things are done in a certain
manner. And any sort of new program, it's
extremely difficult to sell, to organize. So it's
a matter of basic inertia, I think, of getting
something like the Navy or any large organization
to move into a new direction.